Charlie, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. How are you doing?
I'm good. Thanks so much for having me back. It's always a pleasure to be on here.
Well, you are certainly making waves in the Python space these days with all of your projects
and their fastness. I think you're known as the fast Python guy these days. Like,
oh, that's not fast enough. We got to use something from Astral.
The fast Python tooling guy, maybe. Yeah.
yeah exactly exactly so interesting you know we spoke i think you've been on twice before is that
right you talked about i think so yeah i came on once to talk about rough and then i came on in
march shortly after we did the first public release of uv right right and uv at that time
i'll let you tell people what uv is but for those who know it was kind of in the it has pip like
features and now it's yeah it's got another another layer to the onion or another shell to it and
that's actually why i invited you back because there's a lot of interesting things to talk about
there yeah maybe like several more layers too okay well all right well let's yeah yeah let's hear
about them so first of all i guess you know not everyone believe it or not not everyone listened
to that first rough interview and things, our UFF interview and those kinds of things.
So I suppose maybe quick introductions to you, Astral.
How'd you get to where you are?
Yeah, totally.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I've been working on Python tooling full time for a little under two years at this
point.
And my journey, I've been writing Python professionally for a long time, but my journey with Python tooling started with Ruff, which is a very fast Python linter code formatter and code transformation tool.
And the sort of foundational idea of Ruff was, can we make really fast Python tooling?
And so Ruff is written in Rust, but you don't need to have Rust installed or know anything about Rust to use it.
You can just install it with pip or with whatever you're using.
And that whole sort of story for me started from just working with Python a lot
and asking if we could build sort of different Python tooling by using languages like Rust.
So, you know, the first version of Ruff was very minimal, but it's grown from then to have, I don't know,
something like 800 plus rules. If you've used tools like Plaguegate or Pylent in the past,
Ruff can do similar things. So discover issues with your code without running it. It can also
fix them automatically. And then if you've used tools like Black in the past for code formatting,
Ruff can do a similar thing too, where it automatically formats your code.
So that was how I first got started in Python tooling and also how I first ended up on Talk
Python was people were very interested in this when it came out. And I think it broke a lot of
people's minds in the sense that it really changed what was possible. Maybe an analogy. So if you
have unit tests, but to run the unit test takes 30 minutes, there's no one who doesn't just want
to kill time. Who's going to say, I made a small change. Let me run the test and see how that
change it did but if the tests run in 50 milliseconds you could just set up a thing to just
run the test every time code changes and just have a green red light right and i feel like rough did
that for for linting and formatting like for me for example i have it just run ruff on if i ask
i use PyCharm ask PyCharm to reformat the code it just it uses rough to do that or and you can check
the box just say run it when i hit save because you won't notice a difference you know what i mean
yeah yeah i think that's been one of the really interesting things about working on
tooling with the focus on performance has been like if you build things that are way way faster
than what currently exists like not just like a little bit but like significantly faster
the ergonomics of the tool just change a lot so maybe maybe things that you only ran in ci before
you can now run locally and maybe things that you can now run locally you can run
yeah, on save as opposed to on, you know, on commit or on explicit command. So that's been a big part
of, you know, what we've seen with rough. And, you know, the other big piece apart from performance
that we've been, that I think we sort of accidentally made a lot of progress on with rough was
just trying to make things simpler by bundling more stuff together. So rough can do like a lot
of different things. And so you don't need as many to chain together as many tools to get the kind of
setup that you might want to have in your Python projects. And so, you know, a lot of the things
we've built, you know, with Ruff and with uv, they've had these kind of dual goals of, you know,
being much faster, you know, hopefully bringing in some interesting new features and functionality,
but also trying to reduce a little bit of the, you know, the fragmentation and tooling and make
it easier for people, especially, you know, for newcomers who are writing Python for the first
time, to, to kind of get started. And we have, well, you have announcements. I have things to
discuss with you about them, about making that even easier. So that's why some of the big features of
uv, right? For example, what if I don't have Python? Not a problem. So that's pretty, that's
pretty exciting. I think. Yep. Yeah. And we'll get into that, but I do want to just take a, not get
too far past it because even though this episode is not about rough two things one a theme of
astrals is we're going to take some tools or some kind of concept that's been around for a long time
redo it in rust but also not just well we port it over the code but you know rethink some of the
algorithms and some of the assumptions and i think that's also a lot of what makes it faster like the
the way uv works with caching and things like that.
Yep.
And there's been a lot of excitement and positivity about that.
But I think there's also been a little suspicion of, wait a minute, if we write this in Rust,
is it really for Python people, by Python people?
Like, what's your take?
I have some thoughts that are, I don't see it as a negative, but I think it's interesting
interest to discuss, you know, where does Rust actually belong here? Yeah, I mean, I think,
like, the way I view it is that, you know, just like Python itself is implemented in C,
like, it makes some sense for, like, the underlying tooling that people are using to be written in a
different language, if it means that you can ultimately build, you know, tools that are better,
at least on some metrics that people care about.
So like for me, I sometimes view what we're doing as,
like we put all this investment into this tooling,
we write all this stuff in Rust,
which in theory incurs some cost for us.
It's maybe, maybe we move a little bit more slowly,
maybe it's harder.
And in doing so, we kind of like give all these people
who are running these commands,
hundreds of times a day, a big boost in how they work.
And they can keep writing Python, but have a better and better
experience writing Python.
So I don't think it actually really says anything personally.
I don't really think it says anything about Python
that we write the tooling in Rust.
Because sometimes people will criticize Python for that.
But different languages are useful and good
for different things.
And Python is an incredibly productive language.
It's growing more and more every year.
People love writing it.
but maybe it's not the best language to write, you know, a super high performance package manager.
And that's totally fine. Cause like, we're going to do that. And then everyone who's writing Python
can, can benefit from it and can leverage it. yeah, yeah. I do think that one interesting piece
here that I got, you know, we got a lot of skepticism around early on was like, you know,
how can people in the Python community, like contribute to this if it's not written in Python?
you know, how do you like have a sustainable contributor base? And the interesting thing
for me is like, I actually think we've had a really strong contributor base over time. Like we
have, I don't know, like somewhere between four and 500 contributors total, maybe in Ruff, you know,
most of those are like one or two small, you know, one or two commits, maybe just one or two time
committers. You know, but a lot of people have come to Ruff and said, you know, I want to learn
Rust. I come from the Python ecosystem. There's a part of this that's sort of native to what I know,
which is the Python language, the Python semantics.
And it's an entry point for me to learn Rust,
you know, from other people who come from Python.
So, you know, I think there is certainly a cost
to engaging and a cost for contributors
because most, you know, most of our users don't know Rust.
But I don't think it's as steep as people would expect.
And I think, you know, over time,
we have been able to grow a pretty healthy contributor base,
like many people who have never written Rust before.
Yeah, I agree. And I was thinking the same thing that you pointed out that Python itself is written in C.
Right.
Generally speaking, of course, there's multiple runtimes and so on and so on.
But CPython, the one that we generally use, is written in C.
And I don't see why there should be an allegiance to C over Rust or anything.
And a lot of the data science tools are written in C or Portran even, you know, something really wild like that.
And Python is a way to kind of expose them and make them more accessible, more useful, make people more productive on top of those.
That's that native code.
Yeah, yeah.
A third example would be Jupyter, JupyterLab, Jupyter Notebook, all those things.
When you talk to the contributors of those projects, they're down in TypeScript, in JavaScript, close to their day.
so the data science folks
don't have to write TypeScript and JavaScript
they just work in the tooling
that's on the front end
and so it's kind of like
to me it's kind of like let's take one
for the team
we'll do this so we all benefit but you don't have to
you don't have to do it
I actually think it's one of the kind of
one of the real strengths of Python
is the
interoperability around
native code and extension modules
it's like a big it's actually like a big part of python and it's a big part of um why python has
succeeded um and i think that will actually become more i mean this is sort of like going
on a tangent a little bit but i think that will become a bigger and bigger part of like
what python looks like and what it looks like to to to work with python um because uh you know and
i think rust can actually play an interesting role here because at least from my perspective like
I do not have a systems programming background.
Like I've not, I've definitely not written any C professionally.
I don't think I've ever really written any C++.
And Rust was my first sort of foray into that kind of programming.
And I think at least me, you know, for me personally, I found it much more accessible.
And so I think Rust and Python actually have this interesting story where Rust to some degree
is this kind of like superpower low-level layer
that you can drop into
and then expose with a Python CLI
forever in a consume.
So anyway, my prediction is
I think that will only become more and more
of a part of what Python looks like.
And that's actually,
I think it's actually a good thing.
Yeah, I do too.
I do too.
Jake out in the audience,
Jake Collahan,
who says in another comment,
great timing.
I just released a video on these changes yesterday.
So that's awesome.
But the progress made in rough
or introductions clearly demonstrates that there's a strong contributor base even when it's based on
rust right yeah yeah i'm not trying to i'm not trying to dismiss that it's hard to learn rust
because i actually think it is pretty hard to learn rust and i think the learning curve is pretty
steep but you know i think the thing we found is there are people who are interested and who want
to do it sure sure that agreed i think another thing that it shows regardless of rust or not
is if it's your full-time job and there's funding and a team rather than part-time work
it can go many times faster towards a goal than before i'm sure you've felt that way
yeah i mean we're in a very unique i mean not completely unique but fairly unique position
whereby um we yeah we can fund people full-time to work on this stuff and it's actually just kind
of wild to look at how much, you know, not to sort of talk up our own work, but just how much you can
accomplish in a relatively short period of time with that level of, you know, when people are kind
of unlocked to work in that way and work on those kinds of problems. So, you know, just thinking,
it's like the amount of time we've been able to put into Ruff and uv is like sort of hard to fathom
for some open source projects. It's like, wow, that's incredible. You know, but from the perspective
of a company, it's actually like quite reasonable. And in fact, not even that, not even like that
much. So, you know, I think it's pretty like the leverage that you have with open source,
like when people are able to invest in it and really focus on it is, is pretty amazing.
Because, you know, we, we work on these things, we improve these things and they ship out to,
you know, I don't know, millions of users or whatever it is. And, and, and really can provide
a huge boost to the ecosystem. So yeah, I mean, being able to work on this stuff full time,
that was actually something that I decided pretty early on with rough was the project was growing
more and more popular. And I was like, I don't know if I can keep up with this if I don't work
on it full time. and so I'm at least going to see where that, where that goes. and it's
possible, right? And here you are. I mean, it is, but yeah, it's, I mean, I just feel like I just
have a lot of respect for people who, you know, are commit significant amounts of their time to
open source alongside everything else because yeah it's i mean it's an amazing thing but it's also
very challenging and it's definitely it's 24 7 well i think it's really positive that
there's a group of people putting their full effort into especially the uv side of things
that that's gonna that's gonna make a dent yeah i mean i think the other thing that's been cool
about um you know building this as a as a company is that we've been able to bring in a lot of people
from like outside of python to come and work on python tooling and um i think that's like a really
healthy thing for the ecosystem because not only are these people you know i think like really
talented and really great, but they also bring like very different ideas and experiences.
And so we have a lot of cross-pollination on the team.
The team's kind of a mix of people who have, who fall everywhere on the spectrum of like,
or axes, I guess, probably not a spectrum of like how much rust experience, how much
Python experience they have.
You know, some of them have mostly worked in like TypeScript and the JavaScript ecosystem.
So that was sort of an intentional thing for me when thinking about like building a team
to work on this stuff was I want to have like some people on the team who are like super
Python experts. And I want to have some people who like bring a totally different perspective to the
problems. so that's been another, like very cool piece of putting together a team to work on
this stuff. I think that's a great perspective. All right. One thing before we move on is talk
about uv proper closing the loop here is you mentioned those rules, those 800 Lint rules.
And this resource you have over at docs.astral.sh slash rough slash rules is awesome. So
even if you don't use rough, you know, you care about say PEP 8 naming or something, you get a
warning from flake 8 or whatever. And it says, under function name, like what is this error,
right? What is this thing? And then you've got each one of these rules has a, what is this?
Why is it bad? How should you change it? Here's the bad version. Here's the good version.
and so on. And I think this is just a really good resource. I know you all put a ton of time.
I appreciate you calling that out. Yeah, it takes a lot of time. I mean, once you cover all the rules,
maintaining it incrementally is slightly easier. But when we started this, we definitely had a few
hundred rules. And so it was a lot of contributors who contributed us getting to full coverage here.
It's almost like the Wikipedia of Lint rules or something.
How to Python. Yeah. Yeah. I guess maybe one thing I'll say is we have a lot of rules,
but you don't have to use them all.
And like the default rule set is actually pretty small.
So even when I work on projects,
I don't necessarily enable all of the rules.
I typically enable like a couple subsets.
So I just think sometimes it can be intimidating
to imagine 800 rules being applied over your code phase.
So, you know, the default rule set is pretty small.
It's covers things like unused imports,
you know, things that are pretty common
and relatively unobjectionable.
And then we have all these different categories
for ways that you kind of level up the level of coverage.
Yeah.
I'd take pretty much the defaults as well on all my projects,
except for wider lines of code,
more columns.
On a 32-inch monitor,
80 columns is just down a little corner.
We actually took that out of the defaults.
Did you?
Oh, beautiful.
So I don't need a ruff.toml or whatever it was
I was putting in there for a configuration.
Yeah, we got rid of that.
Because the thinking there is like,
if you have long lines,
they should generally be handled by a format or not a linter.
So by default, we don't enforce that, yeah.
Okay, interesting.
And then the single quotes versus double quotes,
which we discussed on GitHub, I remember,
I think we talked about it last time.
Yeah, probably.
Maybe as well.
Yeah.
I talked about that with everyone.
Yeah, and Miguel also agrees here.
Amazing docs, the rules are top-notch.
Nice work.
I appreciate that.
Okay, so I know we're going to talk uv,
But Tushar does have a good question out there.
And I don't know if speak to it or don't speak to it.
Are there plans for Ruff to become a PyLance alternative?
So a language server of some sort.
Is this anything you're willing to talk about?
I would say, I mean, yeah,
I think that's like an interesting thing that we'll consider.
It's not something that we are committed to doing
or committed not to doing of building a language server.
I would say that's probably like a few steps away from where we are today, because before we would build a language server, we would probably build, you know, something that could something like a type checker, like something that could deal with type inference and like better understand the relationships between different parts of your code.
I view that as like, it's not strictly a prerequisite to building a language server, but I view that as like a little bit more of a path.
More mypy?
Yeah, more mypy.
I think there's a lot of interesting stuff around building a...
Well, first of all, of course, there's building a type checker,
but there's also building what I would call a type-aware linter.
You could imagine that rough itself could actually get a lot more powerful
if it could do all sorts of type inference.
We have some rules that are only supposed to activate on dictionaries,
and we do some sort of bad local type inference and heuristics
to figure out if we think a variable is a dictionary.
Like if you call not get on it, it might be a dictionary, right?
So if we knew, there's just a lot of interesting things we could do.
We could build a much better tool.
So it's not just about building a type checker.
It's also about how can we build a much better linter and sort of like set of tools.
But yeah, we're thinking about that a lot.
There's a lot of discussion happening about that, both internally and publicly on the repo
and the Discord.
We're thinking a lot about sort of type inference and how to evolve rough in that direction.
So yeah, language server may be something we can do eventually.
It's obviously a huge undertaking.
And we want to make sure that like anything we decide to build, we feel a lot of conviction,
you know, that it can be great because it's not, it doesn't necessarily make sense for
us to try and build something that we think is like, like 5% better than what's out there.
It's very hard to get users to switch to something that's 5% better.
So, you know, when we look at the opportunity set, we're kind of thinking about where can
we have a big impact?
what do users really want you know cross-referenced against where do we think there's opportunity to
build something that that would be an improvement in ways that users care about so yeah very
interesting not something we're focused on right now the language or piece at least yeah so you
guys are gonna need at least a few weeks to get to that huh we're gonna need a few weeks to get
the language server yeah all right i've been out there in the audience says excellent tool rough
and uv have changed my life.
I've talked about rough.
That's very nice.
Yeah.
uv, maybe a quick summary for what it is.
And then we could talk about your post,
which adds layers of features and capabilities as we start.
Yeah, totally.
So I came on the show back in March
and we talked a bit about what uv was at the time.
We released uv in like mid-February.
So that was a couple of weeks after.
And uv is our Python packaging tool.
And it's built under a lot of the same design goals as we had for Ruff.
So we wanted it to be extremely fast.
We wanted it to try and bundle a few more things together
so that you could use fewer tools to work with Python and be productive with Python.
And we wanted it to be really easy to adopt.
That was another principle that we thought about a lot.
So when we released uv in February, it was framed as a pip alternative.
So the idea was if you use pip before, you know, pip install, pip uninstall, or tools
like pip compile or pip sync, it should be really familiar to you.
So the API that we started with was like uv pip install, uv pip uninstall, uv pip compile.
And it was meant to kind of mirror the pip API.
And the idea there was we wanted it to hopefully be immediately obvious to people like how this tool works and what it does.
And also, I guess, to some degree, what it doesn't do.
So we released that in February and it grew extremely fast.
It's yeah, it's just the adoption, both in terms of like raw numbers and just like the companies that we talk to that are using it like very quickly.
a lot of people were using it. I consider it a big success. I'm really happy with how that went.
But it was also, I think, a pretty small portion of what we wanted to build for packaging.
Ultimately, we weren't trying to build just a faster pip. I think it's a really good starting
point for a couple of reasons. One, much easier for people to adopt. Two, it required us to build
a lot of the fundamental pieces that you need for Python packaging. In order to build a PIP
alternative, we had to be able to resolve Python dependencies, install Python packages,
understand virtual environments, manipulate all those things. We had to implement a bunch of
standards around introspecting built distributions and source distributions in virtual environments.
So we had to invest in all these things that I view as fundamental primitives of working with
with Python packaging.
But the ultimate goal for us was always
we want to build something that's
like a single static binary that you download and install
that just gives you everything you need
to be productive with Python.
And from that perspective, a pip alternative is
it's pretty low level.
And we wanted to build something that was a little bit more
high level, something that can install Python for you,
something that can manage the virtual environment for you,
something where you just do run this file
it figures out the dependencies installs them it creates the environments and it runs this violin
the environment like that is what we wanted to build so that's what we've been building up to
over the past couple of months yeah amazing of course you've got to have the uv pip features
as a foundation right because right even if you don't kind of like we talked earlier even if you
don't expose it directly as a CLI thing that from a project management perspective, it's needed,
right? Yeah. And like, it's part of kind of like meeting people where they are to a certain degree.
Like everyone has workflows that are built around pip. Like even people that do other package that
have other packaging workflows, often those workflows are actually built around pip commands.
And like I said, I view those as a little bit low level, like with pip, the operations are kind of like, install this package into this environment, as opposed to here, my dependencies, make sure the world is like in sync with my dependencies. That's what I would consider to be like a little bit more high level. So, you know, we built and released that pip interface in February. And since then, we've, you know, it's basically been like hammered right by by users. So it's just gotten like better and better, because they find problems with it, and then report them. And it just gets, you know, it gets better, it gets faster.
it's like more feature complete so we've had a few months to kind of improve and build on top of it
too yeah that's one of the benefits of such it taking taking hold so much and people using it
so much as they hit the little edge cases all the time and yeah a lot of edge cases
yeah i bet i bet yeah um yeah but it's it's yeah it's super fun like set of problems to work on
by the way, and like really different from rough too. Like, yeah, rough is rough is more like,
uh, it's more like a compiler. I would say like, we have like a parser and Alexa, you know,
all that kind of stuff. And with uv, it's a lot more, how do we do IO really fast? Like we have
a lot of networking. We're like reading and writing from disc a lot. there's a lot of interfacing
with standards, a lot of interfacing with the registry, everything's async. So it's just like
a very different set of problems. And it's fun to get to kind of work on both of them because
they're just really different. Yeah, I'm sure they're both phone projects. And there's some
really good ideas and questions in the audience, but we're not ready for them. So I think when we
spoke back in march one of the things we discussed is how you structured the cli api in a way to leave
space so for example it's not uv install package it's uv pip install package and it's not yes uv
compile --update for dependence it's uv pip compile or whatever the command is right i have
it alias to a couple of letters and i never think about it again but something you know that's
you've left space in the CLI with these sub commands. And I think now we're starting to see
why you left space. Is that right? Yeah. Yeah. That was like pretty controversial at the time
and users really hated it. I mean, they still used it, but like it's so much better. I'll use it.
A lot of people complained about it. I even found it, you know, I even found myself saying like,
maybe we should, maybe we should stop doing this. Like maybe we should just give up because like
people were complaining and I was annoyed by it and stuff. But yeah, it's either a huge,
obviously, it's either a terrible mistake or it was genius. I don't actually know. But what it did
was, one effect, which I said before, was it immediately conveyed the rough shape of the
commands like uv pip install. And then if you've used pip install, you know that the next argument
is a package name or a requirements file. But the other thing it did is it left space in the CLI
for these new APIs that are sort of first-class uv APIs.
So instead of doing uv install,
when we released in February, it was uv pip install,
which meant that today, this new set of APIs
that we launched, let's see, two weeks ago, I think today.
Scroll up, is there a date?
They're August 20th.
So this new set of APIs that we released
are uv lock, uv sync, uv run.
They can all be top level
because they're really like the first class uv workflows.
The pip API, by the way, still 100% there.
And like, we're going to invest in it a lot
and like continue maintaining it.
Cause like that is how most people use uv.
And maybe eventually we want that to be less true, right?
Like, right.
Like we hope more and more people use the new stuff.
But like, we're going to keep building that.
But for projects that can,
we now have this new interface that if you can fit into it,
it's just sort of more powerful and does more for you.
So we saved space in the CLI exactly for this reason,
which is we had a bunch of stuff we knew we wanted to build.
And if we polluted, well, not polluted, it's the wrong word,
but if we polluted the interface with uv install,
if you clogged it.
Yeah, if we lost all that space to those existing commands,
it would make things harder.
So I think it's worked.
It's done.
It's had the intended effect for us.
It kept the space open.
It let people use it.
It conveyed how it works.
And now they kind of exist alongside each other.
And the pip API, you can kind of use them together in certain ways.
And when you use them together, you sort of realize that the pip API is more low level.
It's like the new APIs, you have a pi project toml file with your requirements in it, and you just run uv sync.
And it will resolve them, create a lock file, install them in a virtual environment.
That's like one command.
You could then modify the virtual environment.
You could do UVPIP install, blah, blah, blah,
and start making edits to it.
That illustrates what I mean by
it's a low-level pip APIs
where you're manually manipulating things
versus these higher-level APIs
where you tell us what your dependencies are
and then we figure everything out for you.
Yeah, that's excellent.
Just one comment on the...
It's too many words or it's too long or whatever.
Like I hinted at before,
I just have aliases for these.
So for example, I just type PIR, and that means uv pip install -r requirements.txt.
And like, I don't care if it's uv pip that or it's pip install dash, like whatever.
I don't want to type any of those.
So it's just three that PIR, let's go, you know?
Yeah.
And I've got three or four of those, you know, one to make virtual environments with uv and
a couple of things like that and one to compile the changes.
And, you know, you look up, for me, I look up the docs.
I go, okay, well, here's how I'm going to shorten that
to something I never think about again.
So it doesn't matter.
That's totally fine, right?
That's totally fine.
But you do got to consider, I guess, the workflow for new people.
Maybe that's a good place to talk about the features here.
So one of the things that really...
There's a lot here.
One of the things that, even though it's number three
on the list of four things, is the Python command.
So uv Python install, uv Python list, all of those kinds of things.
I mean, maybe we should start there because without that, we don't have any Python.
Although that runs sort of implicitly under some circumstances, right?
Correct.
Yeah.
Okay.
So part of what we wanted to do with this release was make uv sort of self-bootstrapping,
which sounds complicated.
But the idea there is if you don't have Python installed,
uv doesn't depend on Python.
It's just a binary.
So you download it.
And then when you run a command like UVVM
and you give us a Python version,
if you don't have any Python installed,
if you don't have that version installed,
we will download and install it for you.
So you can sort of seamlessly run these commands
without worrying about how do I install Python,
where is my Python, et cetera, et cetera.
Which means that we can achieve this really cool experience
where the whole set of commands you need
to create a Python application are like,
you curl install uv,
and then you just run uv init-python,
and we create a project for you,
we download and install that version of Python,
you can just start running things.
You don't have to think about how do I install Python,
how do I get it on my machine,
do I have the versions I need, anything like that.
So you can obviously turn this stuff off, right?
And you can use your own,
it'll also respect Pythons
that you have on your machine already.
But part of the goal was we wanted to get to this, I won't call it the holy grail, but this experience of you just download the binary, you do uv run, and everything just works.
So that was a big part of it.
And if you look at the full list of things that we put in this release, there's kind of a lot of stuff, right?
There's like four bullets of things that each of those could be like a big release.
You know, one is like the Python installation.
One is we have this sort of like tool install kind of like pipX.
So if you want toinstall ruff globally, you can do uv toolinstall ruff and we'll install
it for you.
It'll get put in your path, everything like that.
We have these project management APIs that I've hinted at a little bit throughout this
conversation, like uvrun, uvlock, uvsync.
Yeah, we'll get into it.
And we have, yeah, we have this thing around script execution.
So, you know, I thought for a long time, I thought that these would actually all be separate
releases, that we would do a staggered series of releases.
And I was excited about that because, well, first of all,
that's always fun.
You kind of have a bunch of things.
You're shipping one week, one week, one week,
and everyone's like, oh my gosh, they're
shipping so much stuff.
But the thing we found was they're
all kind of interconnected in subtle ways.
And the project management and the tool API,
they're just not as interesting if you don't
have the Python API.
They are interesting, but the fact that we
have the complete story of you do uv run
And we install Python.
We resolve your dependencies.
We install your dependencies.
We run the command in the environment.
Like that whole picture.
Like everything's a little bit interconnected.
So that's how this release came to be so much stuff
is we had this vision for what we wanted the full stories to be.
And they all became somewhat interconnected.
And, you know, in the end, they're all like individually,
I think, really powerful things.
But they kind of come together to give this,
what we want this Python experience to be.
And we're not like totally there yet.
You know, we're missing stuff for sure.
But this was our attempt to capture
kind of a couple of different workflows
that are intertwined in different ways.
Yeah, I see how they all interconnect,
but they are also interesting on their own, right?
Yes.
The Python installation thing is interesting.
And usable on their own, by the way.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
They're all independently used.
You just had one of those.
You'd be like, that's pretty cool.
Okay, I like that.
That's pretty cool.
so let's talk just a bit about a bit more about the python one so
there's there's analogies here to other tools that people may know and the closest one for this would
be py env do you think yeah probably it's like there are obviously differences but that's a very
popular one that that that most you know a lot of people know yeah yeah i'm not saying that they're
identical but it's it fulfills a role that a lot of people were were solving with it now when i
tried to do ienv i don't remember what i was doing wrong but this was the early days of apple silicon
and maybe i had the intel x64 version of homebrew but i had the build tools for arm i can't remember
yeah i could try to do something on your rosetta or something yeah and i couldn't get it to install
anything with PyE&V because it would download it,
it would try to compile it,
then there'd be some weird compiler bug.
And I'm like, you know what?
I'm not debugging the source of,
I'm just not debugging this.
I'm out.
I'm just going to go download it.
And also that's a real,
I compile Python for some of the server stuff I'm doing.
And it takes a while.
It's not that fast.
And when I get it from you guys,
If I say uv Python install 3.12 or something, boom, I get it.
In your standard style, it's fast.
How is it fast?
Yeah, so that comes down to a fundamental difference between what we're doing and what
Py...
I don't know if it's PyMV or PyM, by the way.
I think it's PyM, by the way.
Okay, so I'm just going to say that.
Let's go with that.
If I try to do the other, I will mess up.
So the way that PyPI typically works is...
It's a great tool.
A lot of people use it.
It's building Python from source.
And there are trade-offs around this.
But the idea is it will build the version of Python that you need.
What we're doing is we're building atop a project called Python Build Standalone,
originally created by Greg Sork.
And that's a project that we've started contributing to.
So I think I did the last two releases maybe.
But the idea here is we have these standalone, easily redistributable Python builds.
And when we do a release, it will create Python builds for a bunch of Linux architectures for macOS, for Windows, on all the different Python versions.
And it will also run a bunch of optimizations over them.
So it'll do, you know, it's not these acronyms.
It's not important that you understand them, but, you know, it can do like link time optimization or LTO and profile guided optimization, PGO.
So we build all the binaries.
That's pretty impressive.
Yeah, we do.
That all happens in advance.
So if you go to like the releases page here, like scroll up a little bit and just go to,
just click their latest release.
Yeah.
Right.
You'll see like all the, yeah, like 773 artifacts.
That's like 773 Python builds.
So it's a lot of different pythons.
Yeah.
It's a lot of different pythons.
773 different.
So like, you know, we build all this stuff.
And then when you run Python install, we figure out the correct, see, we have like arm, we
have like all this stuff.
So then we figure out the correct Python for your machine.
We just download and unzip it.
The same way you get a wheel is the way you get this.
Yeah.
I mean, it's actually the same code pretty much like under the hood for us, right?
It's like we stream and unzip it down into disk.
And that's great.
It's like super fast.
It's also, they're already optimized.
Like PyEnv by default does not compile with optimizations.
You can compile with optimizations, but it's not what it does by default.
So these will be noticeably faster than what you would get by default with PyM.
There are some downsides.
Some people like to build from source.
They like to have effectively the full chain of reproducibility in the build.
And now you're kind of trusting us to give you your pythons.
So that is a downside to some people.
But then the next thing you do is you pip install something that has a binary wheel anyway.
Yeah, no, that is true.
There are also a couple quirks with these builds that we're working on a little bit.
Some of it has to do with licensing, the fact that you want to have a statically,
you want to have a self-contained Python, and there are some things in there that require
licensing changes. So there are some slight deviations from what you would get with building
from source from CPython, and those are documented in Python Build standalone.
But the general idea is we pre-build and pre-optimize these Pythons,
and then we download them on demand, and it makes it really fast.
Awesome.
When I go to python.org and download a DMG package or an MSI for Windows or whatever,
it runs this installer process that takes a good long while.
Jake just pointed out a similar experience I had.
It says it took me less than two seconds to install 3.10.
Same thing for 3.12.
So what is, are we missing anything
compared to running a proper installer
that seems to take 20 seconds,
even on a fast computer?
I think those installers also have to do
some operations from source,
most likely because they're not shipping.
I could be wrong about that.
I haven't looked at them closely,
but Python in general,
like, you know, Python.org
does not distribute these kind of pre-built binary distributions for all these different architectures.
And there's interest in doing that, and I'm also interested in doing that. But there are some
things that need to be decided, standards that potentially need to be set. So it's possible that
eventually we can just read, you know, grab these basically from, from python.org. I think
our, py py downloads come from python.org if I'm not mistaken. P Y P Y that is, or actually
might come from P Y P Y.org. Now I can't remember. okay. Anyway, those come from some sort of
official source. Yeah. Yeah. yeah. So, okay. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe eventually. but, but for now,
yeah we're using python build standalone and we've just been trying to grow our familiarity with the
project too right okay so let's give people a sense here like they do not have python at all
or they can't count on having python or the right version of python they can run a single shell
command to get uv which uv can then manage itself they could x install the uv can you homebrew yeah
what other way how well you can get uv on your machine however you want like yeah uv doesn't need
to be in the virtual environment that it's manipulating yeah it can just be anywhere on
your machine and it can operate on any environment external tool sort of deal yeah yeah yeah so you
know you can install it with pip we have our own standalone installers that you can you know curl
um it's on homebrew right it's on you can you can install a pipx you can install however you want
and then ultimately it can operate on any environment on your machine so I actually
don't recommend installing it in a virtual environment I recommend installing it globally
yeah that's how I have it as well working from there yeah I believe I've pip x installed it
because anything that falls into that category for me goes under pip x at least for now yeah
yeah there's um I mean one interesting thing is if you use our installers um like the curl
installers, then you get access to self updates. So you can run uv self update, and we will update
to the latest version. That's right. We can't really do that if you, yeah, you can't do that
if you installed through a different package manager, because we don't really like know how
it was installed. So if you install it through the installer, right, we write a receipt that,
that we understand like where we installed it and all that kind of stuff. So that's, that's one
benefit, but you're not required to do that, of course.
Sure.
I ran into that when I just wanted to see what it would do.
And it said, you install this from a package manager type thing.
So go do that thing.
But that's fine.
I have automation for all those things.
So it's not a big deal.
So to give people a sense, once uv is on your system and in the path, you can say uv, VNV
--Python and put some variation of a Python version.
and if you have it, great, it'll use it, right?
To create the virtual environment.
If you don't have it,
it will then do this two second download install deal,
assuming you have fiber,
and then create a virtual environment based on it, right?
Yep, that's right.
And you can turn that off,
but that is the default behavior.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And you can also pass commands like managed only,
I think it is, or something like that,
where you say, don't use the system Python
Yeah, only use the pythons that uv will install or only use the pythons that are on my machine,
ignore uv's pythons.
There's some customizations around that.
Right, you could do the opposite.
I will also say this version, by the way, this version format request thing is so hard.
Yeah, you'd just be shocked how much engineering work has gone into understanding those requests
and then discovering all the pythons on your machine.
And the discovering all the pythons in your machine problem, by the way, is a problem
that a bunch of tools have had to solve.
And we've talked with the VS Code team about fast Python discovery, because there's just
so many different places that it could be.
On Windows, it's also totally different than on Unix.
So anyway, a lot of work has gone into that.
But it's kind of hilariously flexible now.
You can say CPython greater than or equal to 3.12, and then we'll look for CPython rather
than PyPy or rather than GrailPy or whatever.
Yeah.
So anyway, a lot of our students went into that.
What if I just say uv, V, E, and V, and I have no Python whatsoever?
I think we would install the latest Python.
Would you just go, yeah, just do a latest, like maybe a implicit dash Python space 3.
I think that would kind of give me any Python
from the list of downloads
and then we sort by version.
So I think you would effectively get the latest compatible version.
But now you're kind of quizzing me a little bit.
No, I don't mean to be quizzing you.
I'm just kidding.
All right, so we'll move on.
I know there's so much more
and we don't have a ton of time to get it,
but I just pulled up my warp terminal
and i type uv python list and it shows me a bunch of options for arm 64 for mac os 312.5
312.0 311.9 310 3.8 and so on that i could pick
however i'm just wondering where your cutting edge uh needle or setting is gonna go here
i don't see a 3 of 13. yeah we're working on it we're working on it and one of the things that is
is tricky about any of these packing package manager stories is if i homebrew it i'll see
that there's a new python especially a major release but i might have to wait a week before
it's available on homebrew and but homebrew auto update it but if i install the installer from
python.org it won't auto update it and you know there's just there's always a little drawback yeah
and so when i saw this feature i'm like well if this thing could just really soon have the newest
one that would just be icing on the cake so what is your what is your policy on how quickly to adopt
new things how could it yeah yeah these candidates and betas and things like that yeah like with 3.13
i mean i would like to have it out as soon as there's an rc that's what i would like to do
Okay.
Our policy or our goal is to make sure that it's out before the stable release.
So we would like to not be lagging on the stable release.
And, you know, we view like the minor releases in Python similarly and rough historically.
Like we'll be like, okay, we want to make sure that we support all the 312 language features before 3.12 is stable.
And there were like a bunch of language features in 3.12.
There was like some new grammar.
There were new typing features.
And so the goal there, again, was like,
the goal is to have it out by the time it's stable.
So that's typically like the contract we try and uphold.
And that's still our plan for 3.13.
Okay. Awesome.
Yeah, good to know.
Jay Geller says,
it would be nice to have an option to install pre-release build.
And Tushar says,
the thing is Python build standalone builds 600 releases
per version number.
Having that run daily is too much.
But if anyone could do some interesting caching,
surely the astral folks could do some sweet caching.
It's kind of amazing, though.
That project runs.
We don't own it.
It's not under our org.
That project runs completely for free on GitHub Actions.
Wow.
GitHub is kind of crazy, isn't it?
Yeah, GitHub is ridiculous.
Yeah.
So anyway, that's kind of just...
How much traffic it handles and how much data.
Yeah, they're pretty awesome.
Okay, so if you don't have Python,
you can also, you don't have to do a VNV,
you can just say uv Python install,
give it a version, and then you'll just have that.
Like that's what Jake and I were referring to earlier.
But you can also create a VNV.
And this is sort of a philosophy that I'm getting.
And sorry, someone said this earlier,
but it's scrolled off the live stream comments
that this prefer or require virtual environments by default
rather than prefer to try to jam stuff into system python or the core python and then
it could be a virtual environment if you really know the incantations yeah yeah that's probably
like you know we did the release in february we tried to steer pretty closely to the way pip
behaves to make it easy for people um but we did pick a few battles where we wanted to intentionally
diverge. And this was one of the bigger ones, which is uv by default requires a virtual environment.
So if you try and uv pip install and there's no, we can't find a virtual environment in the current
directory or an active virtual environment, we'll throw an error. And you can opt out of that by
passing a system flag. But unlike pip, right, it's opt out. So you have to, by default, it uses a
virtual environment and you can escape from that if you want to intentionally. So we're trying to
Like with these APIs too, like these are all virtual environment.
Well, the tool stuff, it is, but in a different way, like uv run, uv lock, uv sync, these all
create a virtual environment in the project directory where the project is defined by a
pyproject.com.
So if you run uv run in that directory, it will look at the dependencies, resolve them,
create a lock file, create a virtual environment, install their locked versions into the virtual
environment, run the command.
and it does that every time but it's so fast that we well hopefully so fast that we can do it
so like if the dependencies haven't changed it will still make sure that everything's up to date
so if you just use uv run we try and keep the whole environment in sync for you and you don't
have to think about how do i manage my environment how do i activate it how do i install stuff
but we're pretty like we're pretty pro virtual environment um and one thing i want to do
and it's sometimes hard to hold these lines because you have users who come to you and
want something really different um and it can be hard not to say yes to a lot of the things that
you want um but some lines you know i think we have to hold because they if we can see it on them
sorry, I'm making it sound like a battle,
but if we concede on them,
it just limits the things we can do in the future.
Like if we make things too flexible,
it limits some of the possibilities
of what we can do in the future.
And like one thing that I kind of want to change
the perception around is like,
I think virtual environments are like,
they're here to stay really.
And I am, so we like embrace them,
but I want to change some of how people like
think about virtual environments.
in particular I want to change this whole idea of like activating a virtual environment
like I want it to feel more like node modules which people don't necessarily think you know
highly of node modules like I think when people think of node modules they think of a huge node
modules folder with like a ton of bloat but the idea there is like when you're in a project you
just sort of run commands and all the packages just get installed there and it just runs in the
correct environment with the correct dependencies and that's what that's actually what I kind of
want that's actually what i want python to feel like is yeah there's a virtual environment but
it's actually just kind of like the directories you know it's kind of just like full of packages
full of your dependencies and it just you just use the right one at the right points in time
so that's part of the shift that i want us to move towards a little bit it's part of why
we're very virtual environment first and why we put the virtual environment right in the project
in a specific known place because we want to get away a little bit from this idea of where's the
environment how do i activate it do i have the wrong one activated i want it to feel a little
bit more like it uh it's just sort of native to how the project works okay if you're in the context
of that thing then it just uses the right one is it do you have intentions to do something i can't
remember the path but something to the effect where if you're in a directory and there's no
by project toml or virtual environment but if you went up one or two if we're both would it
fall to that one or would it just go
we don't know. We do do that with uv run
so with uv run we sort of
find the root of the project
so we'll look up at parent directories
but we
don't but if you just run Python
you know blah blah blah obviously we
don't hook into anything there
and so you know
like with a lot of other things like with uv run
uv lock, uv sync like we create a virtual
environment if you use our commands it's kind of just like
everything just works but you can also just
like activate the virtual environment and like do whatever you want because we're kind of trying to
embrace the fact that virtual environments are like everyone knows not you know not everyone
knows how to use them but like people are familiar with them editors and tooling like revolve around
them right so things that try to eject from virtual environments tend to cause a lot of problems for
editors and workflows so part of embracing virtual environments i think again is like
meeting the ecosystem where it is a little bit and being like okay the fact that we use virtual
environments and they're just like in your project means that you don't need like a special like
editor integration to use uv like you know like PyCharm will just like let you use that virtual
environment just a virtual normal virtual environment yes perspective so that's that's
again part of what we're trying to do is like build things that just work for people um and try and
embrace you know the standards and the conventions while also you know maybe influencing or changing
parts of them that we think could be um could be improved or could be made more user-friendly yeah
i don't know why i didn't book you for a two and a half hour podcast because that's what we're
gonna need so vincent from comcode says you be run as such a game changer may work on he may work on
a jupyter runner for that this week feels like such a game changer which is awesome cool yeah there's
a lot of cool ideas too around this sort of sorry good well as you say with with that in mind let's
dive into this whole project management stuff here right like this is yeah i think this is one of the
this is one of the three big pieces of functionality that comes so and you've been talking about
this sort of some of the features like uv run and so on but let's let's talk through
let's talk through like yeah i want to create a project yeah yeah i want to create a project i
don't have the python installed it's a new project i want to create a pyproject.toml but i don't
remember the format for that yep let's go how's that work yeah so so we have like a series of
commands that kind of manage the project life cycle for you so you can run uv init to create a
new project um and it has a couple flags based on whether you want to build like a library or command
line application, whether you want it to be structured as a Python package or maybe it's
just an application that you're running on your machine. But uv init will create the project. You
can then run uvaad, flask, uvaad, FastAPI, whatever to add dependencies. And when you run uvaad,
we'll automatically generate the lock file and sync the dependencies to your system.
So we do have commands like uv lock to generate the lock file and uv sync to
download the correct dependencies into your environment.
But you can also just kind of use these lifecycle commands
and uv will make sure that everything's
in the right state as you go.
So you can run uv add, uv run.
If you do uv run and then Python, blah, blah, blah,
it's-- what happens behind the scenes
is we resolve the dependencies, we
make sure the environment's up to date,
and then we run that command in the environment.
So the whole lifecycle of working with your project
can be managed through uv init, uv add, uv remove, uv run.
um there's a lot that goes into that um and there's also a lot of kind of powerful features
built in here too like when you run uv run it accepts a flag --with so you can do uv run
--with and put a dependency there and it will basically just download that put it in an
ephemeral virtual environment and make it available for the command so you can just pull in one-off
dependencies as you need to run things. I never actually think about activating environments
anymore. Most of the time when I'm running Python commands to run one-off tooling, I'm running
uvrun-with requirements and I give it a requirements file and then I pass the name of the file I want
to run. It just builds the thing you need and runs the command and then throws it away.
And because you have, again, we were talking at the beginning of this episode about how
like really fast tools change the ergonomics.
Like part of what we're trying to build here
is like, if we have this packaging system,
that's really fast,
especially for like repeated operations.
Like I need to keep pulling in,
you know, I've downloaded this package before
and you download it again,
use it for this one command.
Like we can just like throw away virtual environments
and create new virtual environments,
you know, in like in milliseconds.
Yeah.
So if this was a Python dash M V E N V sort of,
it would be way too much overhead.
Yeah.
And so,
you know,
we can,
we can just like,
even like a bunch of dependencies,
like as they've been installed on your machine already,
it's really,
really fast just to pull these things together,
use them and throw them away.
So there's just a lot,
there's a lot of things that we can do.
And I think even like looking forward to the future,
there's a lot of things we can do because we have this like performance
foundation.
Like,
you know,
I'm thinking about what if you want to test code on like a bunch of different
Python versions. Yeah.
And maybe you don't want to like have to keep destroying and recreating your
virtual environment or something like that. Like there's just,
there's just a whole lot of stuff that we can build that would be really hard
to imagine if you didn't have a really fast tool.
Yeah. It's, it changed. It definitely changes what's possible.
Too sure I'll put out an example that it's very near and dear to my heart.
You know what would be great?
If uv could build standalone binaries and embed Python into them.
Yeah.
That's an interesting space.
It's not something we've built anything around, but yeah, I know it's being described there.
I think what I've seen most of the things do is they'll do something like zip up a virtual environment or site packages or something and then put that in a binary.
And then when you run it, it'll spit that out or maybe do a memory mapped sort of magic to try to map into that and unzip it into memory or all sorts of weirdness.
And I think really for this to be easy, somewhere along the way, I could be wrong, not a core
developer, but I feel like Python's import behavior needs to be able to import from an
embedded resource in a compiled binary rather than stick in a binary and have the binary
do weird things where it fakes out the path.
Because there's always something that falls apart.
But if the pip itself, like, say, okay, we can import from a memory stream and not just
from file system, then these things would be like, oh, well, if that's the case, here's
how you just embed those and off it goes.
You know, it'd be more like go or say, here's your one thing, you run it.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
There's definitely interesting stuff to explore there.
And there's some interesting tools that exist already to try to facilitate some of those
things.
Yeah.
It's also we've invested time in yet though.
Yeah, all right.
Well, yeah, I was thinking Pi app is similar.
Yeah.
Yeah, Pi app is definitely, I've used Pi app before.
Actually, I have an app running in my system right now.
It's in a little menu bar thing that's a Pi app app.
And it works well.
It does work well.
Yep.
Okay.
So the project API is kind of like, you know, if you've used like poetry or PDM, like these
tools that are oriented around working on a project, and you have a Pi project Toml that
defines your dependencies and you might have some sort of structure. It's based around that kind of
workflow of working on a project, which, you know, is that's like one way that people work with
Python, but there's a lot of ways, there's a lot of things that people do with Python, which is why
we have a couple of different APIs, right? So we also have this, this tool API, like uv tool install
uv tool run, which we've alias to uvx. These are for running. Yeah. Yeah. These are for running
one-off, not one-off commands, but things that you want installed globally. So you might want
rough installed globally on your machine so you can run it on a bunch of different projects.
We call those tools and you install them, similar if you've used pipx before,
we install them into dedicated environments and put them on your path. And there's a lot of really
cool stuff here. I now use uvx all the time when I want to run things. So I'll do uvx ruff check.
And that translates to uv tool run ruff,
you know, run the check command.
Behind the scenes, what it does is
it finds the latest version of rough,
it creates an environment with that version,
and then it runs the command
using the rough binary in there.
And there's really no overhead to that
if you're kind of running it repeatedly.
So, you know, this is oriented around
like a different way of working with Python
where you have these tools
that you need to run on your machine.
and you use them for different things.
So we have like the project interface
for working on a project.
And then we have the tool interface
for running Python, you know, command line tools.
Yeah.
So uvx run, well, uvx is the run version.
You've also got the install.
I have some thoughts on when I might do one or the other,
but the uv tool install seems like something
you might want to run and have around
and have autocomplete in your shell.
So I could type RU tab and get rough,
or I could uv tool.
I think for things you're going to run repeatedly,
it makes a lot of sense to install them.
Also, if you have,
like if you ran uv toolinstall ruff,
and then you ran like uvx rough,
we would use the installed version.
So if you already have the tool installed,
we'll still pull the installed version,
assuming it's compatible with the version request
that you made.
So like, yeah, I generally like uv tool install things that I'm going to run, you know, multiple times.
The other really nice thing about uv tool install is we have uv tool upgrade.
So you can do like uv tool upgrade --all and we'll upgrade all the installed tools.
So you don't have to think about like, which tools do I have installed?
Like what versions are they at?
Are they out of date?
So, you know, it kind of gives you a way to manage all the Python tools that you're using at a kind of global level.
So, you know, we have a lot of commands like in our docs, we have a lot of like automation
tooling built around Python, like, you know, rough and uv are written in Rust, but a lot
of our like documentation tooling, like we have a lot of scripting in Python.
And all of our docs now in the doc string at the top have like the uvx command that you
run to like run the script.
Nice.
And so I just like copy that and paste that.
And then the script just runs with all of its dependencies.
So it's like, it's just super, it's just very, very convenient, I think.
Like all these APIs and the way they come together.
And there's a lot, I know it's a lot of different stuff.
And that was actually my biggest fear with this release was it's hard to succinctly explain what this release is.
Because it's a lot of different things.
And it's not like when we released uv in February.
when we released uv in february it's like this is a new tool it if you know pip
it's a synced way like what we're doing um and in this release it's like it's actually like a lot
of different stuff that comes together to tell what i think is a very coherent story but it's
hard to succinctly explain exactly what what you know what we did um yeah and i was very
like the response to it i was really heartened you know to see that people were people were
like getting it and they were getting different parts of it like different parts of it were
speaking to different people um because i actually think different parts of it are like relevant to
different ways that people work with python so a lot of people were excited about you know the
lock files the uv run a lot of people were excited about the fact that we have this like scripting
API. So you can like have these standalone scripts where the dependencies are embedded in them. And
if you do uv run that script, you know, we just resolve the dependencies, download, download
them and run the command with those dependencies available, run the script with those dependencies
available. So you can have these like hermetic Python scripts. you know, we had the Python
install API. So there were just different things that were resonating with people, which I think
is what made me happiest in the response to it. Did you read, I'm sure you read Armin's Ryan uv
August is harvest season of Python packaging.
Yeah.
That's a pretty positive take and a pretty wide ranging recommendation there.
It's pretty interesting.
Yeah.
The relationship with Rye is something we get a lot of questions about.
And, you know, I think like when we, you know, when we took over Rye, the goal was always
is like we want to build uv up until to be a suitable replacement that people can migrate from
ride to uv. But, and we're getting further along that path, but there's still like things we're
missing. We don't plan on like deprecating rye any, you know, anytime soon, but all of our like
new feature development is really happening in uv and riots mostly like bug fixes, like keeping
things up to date. So, you know, rye has actually benefited a lot from uv because it uses uv under
the hood so like rye has just gotten like there's new features there's you know it's gotten faster
um but you know our goal is really to like find the things that are missing from rye and make sure
we can support them in uv yeah last one we've got to cover here is you have any uh points out
single file scripts with dependencies that's the last one the script execution so
yeah this is a huge problem is i one of the reasons i think um tushar was suggesting it and
i'm also really excited about it is if you could bundle your code into an application
one of the benefits is you don't have to have a conversation with everyone that runs it
how to do virtual environments how to do package management all this kind of stuff you just say run
click it or whatever and somewhat short of that is i want to give you just a script of some sort
yep but and just say run this right here's the script you have an example.py to run that
but if you put some sort of magical incantation which is backed by a PEP to say what it actually
requires then uv --script something it'll just see that and go okay or uv run rather it'll
see that install the pieces ephemerally right and run that's pretty cool yeah exactly so as
our kind of our last thing before we run out of time this is this is backed by a PEP um i think
it's 723 if i recall correctly so this is like a standardized uh this syntax at the top of the
file is standardized. Might not be mentioned somewhere. Yeah. There's a bunch of PEP conversations,
but not the one. Yeah. We sometimes try and like shy away from talking about user facing features
in terms of peps. Yeah. It's because it's not three. That's it. Yeah. Okay. Well, there it is.
But anyway, the, so the idea here is like, you can declare the dependencies for the script
right in the script. And then when you do uv run that script, we read that dependency data and we
run the script in an environment with those dependencies. So the other, I think, really
cool piece here is I talked before about uv add. So if you're in a project with a PI project
Toml, you can do like uv add FastAPI or whatever, but you can also do that for scripts. So if you
scroll if you look for like uv add --script so you refer to this like magical incantation at
the top we will actually like create that for you so if you do uv add --script and then the
script name and the dependencies like we'll actually just like put that stuff in there for you
so you don't actually have to like remember how to do that like you can just do uv run dash dash
--script and we will actually like populate that field um so you can create a script you can
manage the dependencies in it with uv you can run it um this is like super useful there's some
interesting conversations happening now too around like what if we want to have a lock file for these
because it's a little bit different right this is a this is the list of dependencies it's not the
list of resolved versions so if you wanted to have like full reproducibility you probably want
a lock file um and just interesting the not just these things versions but they're the transitive
closure of all the dependencies.
Correct.
You know, everything they depend on.
Yeah.
So, you know, we do that for projects.
Like if you do uv lock in a project, we create this lock file.
That's all the transitive dependencies.
It locks the exact URLs, the hashes, the versions, everything.
We don't do that right now for scripts just because there's no, there isn't really a place
to put it.
But we're kind of thinking about.
Have you considered Windows registry?
I mean, you could always just like integrate that and import that over to Mac and Linux.
That'd be fine.
Yeah.
I just put everything in the windows registry.
That's a winning.
No.
Yeah.
No,
I totally get it.
Yeah.
I mean,
the other thing is interesting too,
is like the notebooks,
like people are thinking about how can we add this kind of functionality to
notebooks and,
um,
you know,
being able to declare the dependencies for a notebook,
right in the notebook,
being able to lock them to,
it's a lot of cool stuff that we can build now that we have all these
primitives connected.
Yeah,
for sure.
I mean,
You could do something like take a hash of the file
and then use that hash as the name.
And as long as the file doesn't change, it'll run the same.
I don't know.
But yeah, I'll leave that to you all.
So I think-- I mean, we didn't even talk about the speed
for some of these things.
And there's a whole lot of stuff here.
But--
There's a lot of good stories to tell
about how we made some of these things--
the problems we had to solve to build some of this stuff.
But they'll make for--
if I dream they'll make for good blog posts in reality,
they'll probably make for good Twitter threads.
Absolutely. All right. Well, Charlie, thanks for being here.
Maybe give us a final thoughts and words for folks who are interested in this,
this new layer of uv.
Yeah. I mean, I think like this is,
this release is really different from the previous release in part,
because we designed and built a lot of stuff that's pretty new for people and
also requires people to change their workflows in a lot of cases. Like the previous release,
it was like, this is a lot like pip, so kind of just drop it in. And now it's like, here's a bunch
of ways to use this tools. It does require you to work a certain way and kind of think a certain
way, but we think it's really powerful. And that's all stuff we're like kind of trying to figure out,
right? So we're very eager for, you know, I'm sure all this stuff will change. And I'm just eager for
like every release, I'm just excited to have it out, have people testing it, have people using it
so we can get feedback. And so I would love for you to try it out. I'd love even more for you to
come file issues about the things that don't work so we can make it better and better.
But I think we have a really cool foundation here. We can build a lot of things that hopefully
make working with Python a lot easier in the sense that the tools kind of get out of your way
rather than getting in your way.
So yeah, that'll be our focus for the next while
is seeing how people are using this stuff
and seeing where we can make it better.
Well, I think it's pretty awesome what you're up to.
Big fan of uv.
So happy to see the project.
Thank you.
Progress here and always happy to have you on.
So thank you.
Yeah.
See you later.
Bye.